Pattern Documentation: How-To: Load Parameters in Batch (#5237)
nasa/fprime: docs/how-to/prm-write-how-to.md

> # How-To: Import Parameters to the GDS

Reviewer: Also the title should more be something like "Load parameters in batch" or something, they're loaded into FSW not GDS

## Overview

> This guide assumes you are familiar with the [**PrmDb component**](https://github.com/nasa/fprime/blob/devel/Svc/PrmDb/docs/sdd.md) (F´ framework standard), which stores and manages parameters in F´ deployments. This guide will go over two methods of updating parameters: through a `.dat` file or through a `.seq` file. Both types of files are created by the `fprime-prm-write tool` using a JSON file with the parameters. The PrmDb component loads parameters from binary `.dat` files that contain a CRC32 header followed by parameter records. CmdSeq loads parameters from a binary created from a `.seq` file.

Reviewer: Rather than say "you are familiar with", I would simply encourage users to read through the SDD first.

> This guide assumes you are familiar with the [**PrmDb component**](https://github.com/nasa/fprime/blob/devel/Svc/PrmDb/docs/sdd.md) (F´ framework standard), which stores and manages parameters in F´ deployments. This guide will go over two methods of updating parameters: through a `.dat` file or through a `.seq` file. Both types of files are created by the `fprime-prm-write tool` using a JSON file with the parameters. The PrmDb component loads parameters from binary `.dat` files that contain a CRC32 header followed by parameter records. CmdSeq loads parameters from a binary created from a `.seq` file.

Reviewer: > CmdSeq loads parameters from a binary created from a `.seq` file.

is a bit oversimplified. It executes a sequence of command which has been crafted to update parameters.

Reviewer: it's important to understand the different implications - `.dat` is centrally loaded by `Svc.PrmDb` at startup, and again when commanded to. Parameters that retrieve parameters will then see the updated value. The `.seq` approach is going the other way, through the CmdSequencer, by sending commands to each component to SET/SAVE their parameters

```bash
fprime-prm-write dat <json file> --dictionary <path to compiled FPrime dict>
```

**Example: Ref project:**
```bash
fprime-prm-write dat params.json \
  --dictionary build-artifacts/Linux/Ref/dict/RefTopologyDictionary.json
```

This creates `params.dat` in the same directory as your JSON file.

> [!NOTE]
> The output file is named based on your input JSON file. If your JSON file is named `my_params.json`, the output will be `my_params.dat`.

### Step 2: Start the GDS

**With GUI:**
```bash
fprime-gds
```

**Without GUI (Command Line):**
```bash
fprime-gds -g none --log-directly
```

### Step 3: Load the Parameter File

**Using GUI:**
1. Launch the GDS using `fprime-gds` and open up the browser window
2. Navigate to the **Commanding** tab
3. Find and select `FileHandling.prmDb.PRM_LOAD_FILE`
4. Fill in the arguments:
   - **fileName**: `"params.dat"`
   - **mode**: `MERGE` (merge with existing) or `CLEAR` (replace all)
5. Send the command
6. Check the **Events** tab for `PrmFileLoadComplete`

**Command Line:**
```bash
# Load the .dat file into staging area 
fprime-cli commands send FileHandling.prmDb.PRM_LOAD_FILE "params.dat" MERGE
# Check events for success

> fprime-cli events list | grep -E "PrmFileLoadComplete|PrmDbFileLoadFailed|PrmFileBadCrc"

Reviewer: I don't think that command exists. Should be sufficient to say to look for the events in GDS and/or FSW logs

```

**Expected events:**

| Event | Status | Description |
|-------|--------|-------------|
| `PrmFileLoadComplete` | ✓ | File loaded successfully |
| `PrmDbFileLoadFailed` | ✗ | File not found |
| `PrmFileBadCrc` | ✗ | CRC checksum error |

### Step 4: Commit the Staged Parameters

After verifying the load succeeded, commit to make parameters active:

**Using GUI:**

Send `FileHandling.prmDb.PRM_COMMIT_STAGED` (no arguments). Check the **Events** tab for `PrmDbCopyAllComplete` to confirm the commit succeeded.

**Command Line:**
```bash
# Commit staged parameters

> fprime-cli commands send FileHandling.prmDb.PRM_COMMIT_STAGED

Reviewer: `command-send`

# Verify the commit operation succeeded

> fprime-cli events list | grep "PrmDbCopyAllComplete"

Reviewer: same as above, `events list` doesn't exist, look at GDS/FSW logs

```

### Step 5: Verify Parameter Changes

**Recommended Method: Check telemetry for each parameter**

Each parameter has a telemetry channel. Check the **Telemetry** tab in the GDS GUI or:

```bash

> fprime-cli telemetry list | grep <parameter-name>

Reviewer: also doesn't exist - let's remove step 5, this is fairly component-specific

> [!TIP]
> **Using the `--save` flag:** The generated `.seq` file contains `_PRM_SET` commands that update parameter values in memory. If you want the changes to persist across FSW restarts, add the `--save` flag to include `_PRM_SAVE` commands after each `_PRM_SET`, which writes the parameters to the PrmDb.dat file on the FSW.

### Step 1: Generate the Sequence File

**General syntax:**
```bash
fprime-prm-write seq <json file> --dictionary <path to compiled FPrime dict>
```

**Example: Ref project:**
```bash
fprime-prm-write seq params.json \
  --dictionary build-artifacts/Linux/Ref/dict/RefTopologyDictionary.json
```

This creates `params.seq` in the same directory as your JSON file.

### Step 2: Execute the Sequence

1. Compile the sequence file to binary format:
   ```bash
   fprime-seqgen params.seq --dictionary build-fprime-automatic-<platform>/<YourDeployment>/dict/<YourDeployment>TopologyDictionary.json
   ```
   This creates `params.bin`.

> 2. Load the sequence into `CmdSequencer`:

Reviewer: `params.bin` file need to be uplinked to spacecraft - add a step for that, linking to the GDS guide, probably the one about the GUI

# How-To: Load Parameters in Batch

## Overview

> Readers of this guide are encouraged to read through the documentation for the [**PrmDb component**](https://github.com/nasa/fprime/blob/devel/Svc/PrmDb/docs/sdd.md) (F´ framework standard), which stores and manages parameters in F´ deployments. This guide will go over two methods of updating parameters: through a `.dat` file or through a `.seq` file. Both types of files are created by the `fprime-prm-write` tool using a JSON file with the parameters. The PrmDb component loads parameters from binary `.dat` files that contain a CRC32 header followed by parameter records. CmdSeq loads parameters from a binary created from a `.seq` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Readers of this guide are encouraged to read through the documentation for the [**PrmDb component**](https://github.com/nasa/fprime/blob/devel/Svc/PrmDb/docs/sdd.md) (F´ framework standard), which stores and manages parameters in F´ deployments. This guide will go over two methods of updating parameters: through a `.dat` file that PrmDb loads directly, or by generating a command sequence (`.seq` file) to dispatch a series of commands.
```

> This guide uses the [**Ref**](https://github.com/nasa/fprime/tree/devel/Ref) (reference) F´ project as an example.

Reviewer: This link is outdated. We could also just remove it cause there isn't much of an example, it's just using the same names

Create a JSON file (e.g., `params.json`) anywhere in your project directory:

**Generic Format:**
```json
{
  "ComponentInstance": {
    "parameterName": value,
    "anotherParameter": value
  },
  "AnotherComponent": {
    "paramName": value
  }
}
```

### Example: Ref Project Parameters

**`params.json`:**
```json
{
    "Ref.recvBuffComp": {
        "parameter1": 20,
        "parameter2": -5
    },

    "Ref.sendBuffComp": {
        "parameter3": 25,
        "parameter4": 99.99
    },
    "Ref.typeDemo": {
        "CHOICE_PRM": "RED",
        "CHOICES_PRM": ["ONE", "BLUE"],
        "CHOICE_PAIR_PRM": {
            "firstChoice": "RED",
            "secondChoice": "BLUE"
        }
    }
}
```
Component instance names must be fully qualified (e.g., `Ref.recvBuffComp`). 

> [!NOTE]
> The .seq method only handles primitives (strings, numbers, booleans, enums).
> Parameter values may be complex F´ types **only when using the .dat method**:
> - **Primitives**: Numbers (`20`, `99.99`), booleans, strings
> - **Enums**: String constants (e.g., `"RED"`, `"BLUE"`)
> - **Arrays**: JSON arrays (e.g., `["ONE", "BLUE"]`)

> > - **Structs**: Nested objects with field names as keys (e.g., `{"firstChoice": "RED", "secondChoice": "BLUE"}`)

Reviewer: The information here is a bit confusing (e.g. `Enums: String constants ...` what does this mean?)

I get that it's basically mapping how to represent a type in the JSON, but it should be clearly stated, or removed. Since we have clear examples above, I would just remove.

> [!TIP]
> **Using the `--defaults` flag:** By default, the `fprime-prm-write` tool only includes parameters explicitly listed in your JSON file. If you add the `--defaults` flag, the tool will include all parameters that have default values defined in the dictionary. This effectively resets all parameters to their defaults, except for those you specify in the JSON file. This flag works for both `.dat` and `.seq` file generation.

All steps from this point on either take place in the terminal or the GDS GUI.

## Method 1: Generate a `.dat` File

Use this method to load a binary parameter file into the `PrmDb` component at any time. 

### Step 1: Generate the `.dat` File

Run the tool in the terminal:

**General syntax:**
```bash

> fprime-prm-write dat <json file> --dictionary <path to compiled FPrime dict>

Reviewer: nit: here's a common way to represent these placeholders

```suggestion
fprime-prm-write dat <path/to/paramFile.json> --dictionary <path/to/dictionary.json>
```

```

**Example: Ref project:**
```bash

> fprime-prm-write dat params.json \

Reviewer: nit: we usually don't use `\` and a newline in those CLI examples, since the codeblock will handle the rendering & copy/paste

  --dictionary build-artifacts/Linux/Ref/dict/RefTopologyDictionary.json
```

This creates `params.dat` in the same directory as your JSON file.

> [!NOTE]
> The output file is named based on your input JSON file. If your JSON file is named `my_params.json`, the output will be `my_params.dat`.

### Step 2: Start the GDS

**With GUI:**
```bash

> fprime-gds

Reviewer: Let's remove this `Step 2: Start the GDS` - users should know, and it's also mentioned as the first sub-step in Step 3

```

**Without GUI (Command Line):**
```bash
fprime-gds -g none --log-directly
```

### Step 3: Load the Parameter File

**Using GUI:**
1. Launch the GDS using `fprime-gds` and open up the browser window
2. Navigate to the **Commanding** tab

> 3. Find and select `FileHandling.prmDb.PRM_LOAD_FILE`

Reviewer: There's a step that's missing which is that you need to uplink the file to FSW. This works for local testing because you're running GDS and FSW on the same machine (your laptop)

4. Fill in the arguments:
   - **fileName**: `"params.dat"`
   - **mode**: `MERGE` (merge with existing) or `CLEAR` (replace all)
5. Send the command
6. Check the **Events** tab for `PrmFileLoadComplete`

**Command Line:**
```bash
# Load the .dat file into staging area 

> fprime-cli command-send FileHandling.prmDb.PRM_LOAD_FILE --arguments "params.dat" MERGE

Reviewer: Let's not have the `fprime-cli` way here, because we don't currently have a way to uplink a file through the CLI anyways, so GUI is required.

**Command Line:**
```bash
# Commit staged parameters
fprime-cli command-send FileHandling.prmDb.PRM_COMMIT_STAGED
# Verify the commit operation succeeded
grep -q "PrmDbCopyAllComplete" gds.log
```

### Step 5 (optional): Verify Individual Parameter Changes

**Downlink and decode PrmDb.dat**

If your deployment has file downlink configured (using `Svc.FileDownlink`), you can verify by downloading and decoding the parameter database:

1. Use your deployment's file downlink commands to retrieve `PrmDb.dat` from the FSW
```bash fileDownlink.FileDownlink_SendFile```
2. Decode the downloaded file to a JSON file for human readability
   
   **General syntax:** Using the inverse `fprime-prm-decode` tool
   ```bash
   fprime-prm-decode PrmDb.dat \
     --dictionary build-fprime-automatic-<platform>/<YourDeployment>/dict/<YourDeployment>TopologyDictionary.json \
     --format json \
     --output downlinked_params.json
   ```

3. Compare with your input
   ```bash
   diff params.json downlinked_params.json
   ```

## Method 2: Generate a `.seq` File

> Sometimes you need to update parameters while F´ is running without loading files. This can be accomplished with a sequence of _PRM_SET commands, which the `fprime-prm-write` tool can automatically create for you. This creates `.seq` which can be compiled and executed by `Svc::CmdSequencer`.

Reviewer: > Sometimes you need to update parameters while F´ is running without loading files.

Both solutions (dat/seq) involve uplinking a file. The difference is which component will do something with that file (PrmDb directly, or CmdSequencer which sends commands to individual components)

> [!TIP]
> **Using the `--save` flag:** The generated `.seq` file contains `_PRM_SET` commands that update parameter values in memory. If you want the changes to persist across FSW restarts, add the `--save` flag to include `_PRM_SAVE` commands after each `_PRM_SET`, which writes the parameters to the PrmDb.dat file on the FSW.

### Step 1: Generate the Sequence File

**General syntax:**
```bash
fprime-prm-write seq <json file> --dictionary <path to compiled FPrime dict>
```

**Example: Ref project:**
```bash
fprime-prm-write seq params.json \
  --dictionary build-artifacts/Linux/Ref/dict/RefTopologyDictionary.json
```

This creates `params.seq` in the same directory as your JSON file.

### Step 2: Execute the Sequence

1. Compile the sequence file to binary format:
   ```bash

>    fprime-seqgen params.seq --dictionary build-fprime-automatic-<platform>/<YourDeployment>/dict/<YourDeployment>TopologyDictionary.json

Reviewer: I would just use a placeholder in the form of `<path/to/TopologyDictionary.json`

   ```
   This creates `params.bin`.

2. Load the sequence into `CmdSequencer`:
   - **GUI**: 

>    1. Send `FileHandling.cmdSeq.CS_RUN` command with the binary file name

Reviewer: These are in the wrong order, you need to uplink the `params.bin` sequence file first, then execute it with `CS_RUN`. Also should call out that the argument needs to be `/seq/params.bin` which is the full path onboard after it's been uplinked.

   2. [Stage and uplink](https://fprime.jpl.nasa.gov/devel/docs/user-manual/overview/gds-introduction/#navigating-the-gds-gui) the params.bin file.
   - **Command Line**: 
     ```bash

>      fprime-cli command-send <project>.cmdSeq.CS_RUN --arguments PrmDb_input.bin BLOCK 

Reviewer: Good call on stage and uplink here, but so let's remove the `fprime-cli` option as well since we need the GUI anyways

    ```
    | Event | Status | Description |                                                                                  
    |-------|--------|-------------|                                                                                  
    | `CS_SequenceLoaded` | ✓ | Sequence file loaded successfully |                                                   
    | `CS_CommandComplete` | ✓ | Each command in sequence completed |                                                 
    | `CS_SequenceComplete` | ✓ | Entire sequence finished successfully |                                             
    | `CS_FileNotFound` | ✗ | .bin file not found |                                                                   
    | `CS_FileReadError` | ✗ | Error reading the file |                                                               
    | `CS_FileInvalid` | ✗ | Invalid file format or structure |                                                       
    | `CS_FileCrcFailure` | ✗ | CRC checksum mismatch |                                                               
    | `CS_CommandError` | ✗ | A command in the sequence failed |  
 

>     For more details, follow the standard [F´ sequencing workflow](https://nasa.github.io/fprime/UsersGuide/user/cmd-seq.html).

Reviewer: Link is outdated and gives a 404

## Troubleshooting

### Error: `PrmFileBadCrc`

**Cause:** CRC checksum mismatch.

**Fix:** Regenerate with an up-to-date version of `fprime-prm-write`.

### Error: `PrmDbFileLoadFailed`

**Cause:** File not found.

**Fix:** Verify file path and ensure it's accessible to the FSW.

### Error: `RuntimeError: Unable to find param <name> in dictionary`

**Cause:** Parameter name doesn't match dictionary.

**Fix:**
- Use fully qualified component names (e.g., `Ref.recvBuffComp`)
- Check parameter names are exact (case-sensitive)
- Verify dictionary path is correct

## References

1. [fprime-prm-write Tool README](https://github.com/nasa/fprime-gds/blob/devel/docs/prm-write-README.md)
2. [Svc::PrmDb Component SDD](https://github.com/nasa/fprime/blob/devel/Svc/PrmDb/docs/sdd.md)

> 3. [Ref Deployment](https://github.com/nasa/fprime/tree/devel/Ref)

Reviewer: need to double check those links, I suspect most of them don't work
